Add a page documenting Godot's internal rendering architecture (#6133)
godotengine/godot-docs: development/cpp/internal_rendering_architecture.rst

while providing a starting point for new rendering contributors.

If you have questions about rendering internals not answered here, feel free to
ask in the ``#rendering`` channel of the
`Godot Contributors Chat <https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/rendering>`__.

Rendering drivers
-----------------

Godot 4 supports the following graphics APIs:

Vulkan
^^^^^^

This is the main driver in Godot 4, with most of the development focus going
towards this driver.

Vulkan 1.0 is required as a baseline, with optional Vulkan 1.1 and 1.2 features
used when available. `volk <https://github.com/zeux/volk>`__ is used as a Vulkan
loader, and
`Vulkan Memory Allocator <https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator>`__
is used for memory management.

Both the Clustered Forward and Forward Mobile
:ref:`doc_internal_rendering_architecture_backends` are supported when using the
Vulkan driver.

**Vulkan context creation:**

- `drivers/vulkan/vulkan_context.cpp <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/drivers/vulkan/vulkan_context.cpp>`__

Direct3D 12
^^^^^^^^^^^

Like Vulkan, the Direct3D 12 driver targets modern platforms only.

> **TODO:** Mention required feature level/optional feature levels.

Author: @RandomShaper What's the minimum required D3D12 feature level for the renderer, and what's the optimal level (i.e. with all optional features covered)?

Knowing this would also be useful to list supported GPUs on a troubleshooting page. Specifically, there are some AMD GPUs that support Direct3D 12, but only with a limited feature level (Radeon 200/300 series).

actually use the Vulkan or Direct3D 12 APIs directly. While this is still
lower-level than an API like OpenGL, this makes working on the renderer easier,
as RenderingDevice will abstract many API-specific quirks for you.

**Vulkan RenderingDevice implementation:**

- `drivers/vulkan/rendering_device_vulkan.cpp <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/drivers/vulkan/rendering_device_vulkan.cpp>`__

.. _doc_internal_rendering_architecture_core_shaders:

Core shaders
------------

While shaders in Godot projects are written using a
:ref:`custom language inspired by GLSL <doc_shading_language>`, core shaders are
written directly in GLSL.

These core shaders are embedded in the editor and export template binaries at
compile-time. To see any changes you've made to those GLSL shaders, you need to
recompile the editor or export template binary.

Some material features such as height mapping, refraction and proximity fade are
not part of core shaders, and are performed in the default BaseMaterial3D using
the Godot shader language instead (not GLSL). This is done by procedurally
generating the required shader code depending on the features enabled in the
material.

> By convention, shader files with ``_inc`` in their name are included in other

Reviewer: Maybe also mention that adding include files or more features into the core shaders should only be done if absolutely necessary since they need to compile very quickly? At least that's what I understood from Juan's feedback on my Visual Shader PR: https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/64248#issuecomment-1214167428

Author: Done :slightly_smiling_face:

The clustered and mobile backends don't feature 2D batching yet, but it's
planned for a future release.

The compatibility backend features 2D batching to improve performance, which is
especially noticeable with lots of text on screen.

MSAA can be enabled in 2D to provide line and polygon antialiasing, but FXAA
will never affect 2D rendering as it would look too blurry.

A 2D signed distance field representing the viewport is automatically generated
if an user shader requests it. This can be used for various effects in custom
shaders, such as 2D global illumination.

**2D SDF generation GLSL shader:**

- `https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/canvas_sdf.glsl <servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/canvas_sdf.glsl>`__

3D rendering techniques
-----------------------

Batching and instancing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the clustered and mobile backends, Vulkan instancing is used to group
rendering of identical objects for performance. This is not as fast as static
mesh merging, but it still allows instances to be culled individually.

In the compatibility backend, a more limited form of 3D instancing is also used.

> **TODO:** Check if this is the case?

Author: @clayjohn Does the OpenGL backend in `master` use some form of automatic instancing in 3D? I haven't followed recent developments, so I don't remember if this is different from what's done in 3.x.

**Material shader generation:**

- `scene/resources/material.cpp <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/scene/resources/material.cpp>`__

**Other GLSL shaders for Clustered Forward and Forward Mobile backends:**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/ <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/>`__
- `modules/lightmapper_rd/ <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/modules/lightmapper_rd>`__

**Other GLSL shaders for the Compatibility backend:**

- `drivers/gles3/shaders/ <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/drivers/gles3/shaders/>`__

2D and 3D rendering separation
------------------------------

.. note::

    Only available in the Clustered Forward and Forward Mobile backends, not the
    Compatibility backend. Multiple Viewports can still be used to emulate this
    when using the Compatibility backend, or to perform 2D resolution scaling.

2D and 3D are rendered to separate buffers to allow for 3D resolution scaling
without requiring the use of multiple Viewport nodes (which has greater

> performance and memory usage overhead).

Author: Done.

PS: I've wondered if we should say "SDR" instead of "LDR", as I see "SDR" much more often in popular parlance (such as on [monitor review sites](https://rtings.com/)). I rarely see LDR even mentioned in comparison. Do other engines refer to it as "LDR" or "SDR"?

> performance and memory usage overhead).

Reviewer 2: I've never heard the term "SSR" before, so I can't really say

on screen.

The Clustered Forward backend also supports rendering several directional lights
at the same time (albeit with lower shadow quality when more than one has
shadows enabled). Other backends are limited to only one DirectionalLight
rendered at a given time.

The Forward Mobile backend uses a single-pass lighting approach, with a
limitation of 8 OmniLights + 8 SpotLights affecting each Mesh *resource*. This
limit is hardcoded and can't be adjusted in the project settings.

The Compatibility backend uses a hybrid single-pass + multi-pass lighting
approach. Lights without shadows are rendered in a single pass (using less
accurate additive blending for performance reasons). Lights with shadows are
rendered in multiple passes. This is required for compatibility with low-end
mobile devices, but it has a huge cost to performance. As a result, it's
recommended to only have a handful of lights with shadows in the camera frustum
at most. The maximum number of lights visible at once can be adjusted in the
project settings.

In all 3 backends, lights without shadows are much cheaper than lights with shadows.
Godot currently doesn't separate static shadow rendering from dynamic shadow

> rendering, but this is planned in a future release.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this statement is accurate. Godot doesn't maintain 2 sets of shadow maps (one for static and one for dynamic), but it treats the two differently and only updates shadow maps when dynamic objects change.

Author: The "future release" part refers to this proposal: https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/issues/4635

> Clustering is also used for reflection probe and decal rendering in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clustering is also used for reflection probes and decal rendering in the
```

Clustered Forward backend.

Shadow mapping
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Both Clustered Forward and Forward Mobile backends use the same shadow mapping
> approach, with the use of a Vogel disk for improved filtering. Dithering is also
> used to improve shadow appearance at the cost of some visible graininess.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both Clustered Forward and Forward Mobile backends use percentage closer 
filtering (PCF) to filter shadow maps and create a soft penumbra. Instead of
using a fixed PCF pattern, they use a vogel disk pattern which allows for changing
the number of samples and smoothly changing the quality.
```

Godot also supports percentage-closer soft shadows (PCSS) for more realistic
shadow penumbra rendering. PCSS shadows are limited to the Clustered Forward

> backend as they're too demanding to be usable in the Forward Mobile backend.
> 
> The Compatibility backend doesn't support shadow mapping for any light types yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
backend as they're too demanding to be usable in the Forward Mobile backend. PCSS also uses a vogel-disk shaped kernel.

Additionally, both shadow-mapping techniques rotate the kernel on a per-pixel basis
to help soften under-sampling artifacts.

The Compatibility backend doesn't support shadow mapping for any light types yet.
```

**Depth of field GLSL shader (compute - used for Clustered Forward):**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/bokeh_dof.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/bokeh_dof.glsl>`__

**Depth of field GLSL shader (raster - used for Forward Mobile):**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/bokeh_dof_raster.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/bokeh_dof_raster.glsl>`__

Screen-space effects (SSAO, SSIL, SSR, SSS)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

  Only available in the Clustered Forward backend, not the Forward Mobile or
  Compatibility backends.

The Clustered Forward backend supports screen-space ambient occlusion,
screen-space indirect lighting, screen-space reflections and subsurface scattering.

SSAO uses an implementation derived from Intel's
`ASSAO <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/adaptive-screen-space-ambient-occlusion.html>`__

> (converted to Vulkan). SSIL is derived from SSAO to provide a high-performance
> implementation of screen-space global illumination (albeit with only indirect
> lighting simulated, hence its name).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(converted to Vulkan). SSIL is derived from SSAO to provide high-performance
indirect lighting.
```

SSIL is explicitly not a form of global illumination, I would not call it one either as it will create unfair expectations.

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/ssil_importance_map.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/ssil_importance_map.glsl>`__

**Screen-space reflections GLSL shader:**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/screen_space_reflection.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/screen_space_reflection.glsl>`__
- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/screen_space_reflection_scale.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/screen_space_reflection_scale.glsl>`__
- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/screen_space_reflection_filter.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/screen_space_reflection_filter.glsl>`__

**Subsurface scattering GLSL:**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/subsurface_scattering.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/effects/subsurface_scattering.glsl>`__

Sky rendering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. seealso::

    :ref:`doc_sky_shader`

> Godot supports using shaders to render the sky background. The radiance and
> irradiance maps (which are used to provide ambient light and reflections for PBR
> materials) are automatically updated based on the sky shader.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Godot supports using shaders to render the sky background. The radiance map (which is used to provide ambient light and reflections for PBR
materials) is automatically updated based on the sky shader.
```

There is no irradiance map in Godot 4.0

The SkyMaterial resources such as ProceduralSkyMaterial, PhysicalSkyMaterial and
PanoramaSkyMaterial generate a built-in shader for sky rendering. This is
similar to what BaseMaterial3D provides for 3D scene materials.

A detailed technical implementation can be found in the
`Custom sky shaders in Godot 4.0 <https://godotengine.org/article/custom-sky-shaders-godot-4-0>`__
article.

**Sky rendering C++ code:**

- ` <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/environment/sky.cpp>`__ - Sky rendering
- ` <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/scene/resources/sky.cpp>`__ - Sky resource (not to be confused with sky rendering)
- ` <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/scene/resources/sky_material.cpp>`__ SkyMaterial resources (used in the Sky resource)

**Sky rendering GLSL shader:**

Volumetric fog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

  Only available in the Clustered Forward backend, not the Forward Mobile or
  Compatibility backends.

.. seealso::

    :ref:`doc_fog_shader`

Godot supports a frustum-aligned voxel (froxel) approach to volumetric fog

> rendering. As opposed to a post-processingq filter (which is best suited for
> crepuscular rays), this approach is more general-purpose as it can work with any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rendering. As opposed to a post-processing filter, this approach is more
general-purpose as it can work with any
```

article.

**Volumetric fog C++ code:**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/environment/fog.cpp <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/environment/fog.cpp>`__ - General volumetric fog
- `scene/3d/fog_volume.cpp <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/scene/3d/fog_volume.cpp>`__ - FogVolume node
- `scene/resources/fog_material.cpp <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/scene/resources/fog_material.cpp>`__ - FogMaterial resource (used by FogVolume)

**Volumetric fog GLSL shaders:**

- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/environment/volumetric_fog.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/environment/volumetric_fog.glsl>`__
- `servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/environment/volumetric_fog_process.glsl <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/servers/rendering/renderer_rd/shaders/environment/volumetric_fog_process.glsl>`__

Occlusion culling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While modern GPUs can handle drawing a lot of triangles, the number of draw
calls in complex scenes can still be a bottleneck (even with Vulkan and Direct3D

> 12). Additionally, mobile GPUs are much more constrained in this regard.
> This makes occlusion culling still relevant today.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
12).
```

We don't need to defend the use of occlusion culling in this document
